==========
Pico Setup
==========

As on the Pi, the first thing to do with the :term:`Pico` is get some software
onto it.

.. warning::

    You are about to erase everything on your Pico W. If you've got any code
    saved on there that you want to preserve, take a copy of it first.

The first thing to load is a special MicroPython build which includes
Pimoroni's fabulous "plasma" library. One of the following should suffice,
depending on your model of Pico:

2040-based Pico W
    `pimoroni-pico releases`_

2350-based Pico 2W
    `pimoroni-pico-rp2350 releases`_

For reference, I've used pimoroni-pico 1.21.0 on a Pico W, and
pimoroni-pico-rp2350 0.0.10 on a `Pico Plus 2W`_, but you should probably just
grab the latest build for your specific board. The file should have a name
something like :file:`{board}-{version}-pimoroni-micropython.uf2`.

Find a cable suitable for connecting your :term:`Pico` to your computer, but
don't connect it just yet! Plug one end of the cable into your computer, then
hold down the "BOOTSEL" button on the Pico while inserting the other end of the
cable into the Pico. Continue holding the button for about a second after
you've inserted the cable. This procedure puts the Pico into a mode where you
can re-flash it.

Shortly after, you should see the drive "RPI-RP2" appear. Copy the
pimoroni-pico firmware you downloaded (the
:file:`{board}-{version}-pimoroni-micropython.uf2` file) to this drive. It
should take a few seconds to copy, then a brief time later you should see the
drive disappear again. This indicates the Pico has accepted the firmware and
has rebooted into MicroPython.

Unplug the Pico W from your computer, and plug it into your Raspberry Pi. Now
run the :program:`bxflash` application to copy the Blinken' Xmas script to the
Pico:

.. code-block:: console

    $ bxflash
    Copying mqtt_as.py
    Copying config.py
    Copying blinkenxmas.py
    Copying main.py
    Copying leds.py
    Copying animation.py

At this point all the software installation on both Pi and Pico is done. Time
to move onto the hardware.


Wiring
======

Now it's time to put your :term:`Pico` together with the breadboard. You're
aiming for the following layout where the :term:`neopixel` on the left
represents the start of the 50 neopixel strip (connected to :term:`GPIO` 15),
and the strip on the right (connected to GPIO 16) represents the start of the
100 neopixel strip.

.. image:: images/breadboard.*
    :align: center
    :alt: A breadboard diagram showing the layout of the Pico, neopixels, reset
          button, status LED, and power rails

The power cables off the top of the board are deliberately separate. The wires
on the left rails supply power to the neopixels. The wires on the right rails
supply power to the Pico (via VBUS and ground). These should either be
connected to separate rails of your supply, or entirely separate supplies. In
the latter case, run a cable between the negative rails on each side of the
breadboard to ensure everything has a common ground.

A momentary button connects the Pico's RUN pin to ground so that we can easily
hard-reset the Pico if the software locks up for any reason. Finally, GPIO 22
connects to a 330â„¦ resistor, then an :term:`LED`, then ground to provide a
crude means for the Pico to report status to us (by blinking the LED in various
patterns).

.. note::

    Why not use the LED built into the Pico? Or the reset button present on the
    Pico Plus 2W? Ultimately the Pico and its (bulky) power supply are going to
    be housed in some sort of box to keep small fingers from poking around near
    mains electricity. Unless that box is transparent, it's going to be
    difficult to see the Pico's own LED. Also, while "turning it off and on
    again" is certainly an option for resetting the Pico, a simple momentary
    button is even easier.

    In my current setup, the reset button and status LED are combined into a
    single nice, big, `illuminated button`_ attached to the housing.

This is also the point where you will need to make sure your neopixel strips
have some suitable connections to the breadboard. At its most basic, soldering
some solid-core wire onto the terminals can work. However, where possible I'd
recommend either purchasing sets with pins pre-soldered (although these can be
quite difficult to come by), or buying a set of crimpers and connectors to make
your own connectors (preferably with some heat-shrink for insulation):

.. image:: images/crimped_connector.*
    :align: center
    :alt: A crimped three-pin connector for a neopixel strip

Ideally, you want your :term:`neopixel` connector to stand off from the
breadboard so that it can sit outside your box, and to be irreversible so that
you can't mix up the +5V and ground lines. Typically, wiring for WS2812 (3-pin)
neopixels places the data pin in the middle with the +5V and ground lines
either side. In the picture above, the +5V line is red, the data line is green,
and the ground line is white. The connector on the right can only be mated one
way around, so provided the connections on the breadboard are correct, you will
be unable to connect your neopixel strip the wrong way around.

With the breadboard populated, wire the +5V and ground rails to the relevant
connectors on your power supply.


Housing and installation
========================

With the breadboard fully populated, it's time to install everything in a box.
Prepare a mains cable for the power supply, and install it through an
appropriately sized cable gland in the box for strain relief. Attach the power
supply to the interior of the box by whatever means is convenient. Typical
plastic project boxes may have screw-mount points pre-moulded inside them, but
it's also fine to drill through most such boxes and attach screws to mount the
power supply. Just be sure that any ventilation holes on the power supply
remain uncovered.

Mount the breadboard within the box. Most breadboards have a self-adhesive
backing that is convenient for this purpose. Again, ensure you do not cover
ventilation holes on the power supply, and keep any bare conductors on the
breadboard away from the power supply. Ideally, your box should be large enough
to accommodate power supply and breadboard side by side, but if yours is not
ensure there is adequate separation to avoid any shorts, and to allow free air
flow over the power supply.

Make some holes for the neopixel connectors. Cable glands may be used here, but
aren't as important as for the mains cable which definitely requires strain
relief.

I would recommend the following order for setting up the tree itself:

#. Locate the tree where you like, but ensure a power socket is reasonably
   nearby so that you're not trailing mains cables across the floor

#. Decorate the tree with all the baubles and trinkets you want, *except* the
   neopixel strands

#. Add the neopixels strands

   #. For each strand, start with the unconnected end at the top of the tree
      and wind it around in a spiral until you reach the bottom

   #. Once all strands are on, re-arrange the bottom until the ends that you
      want to connect to the Pico are all gathered together

   #. Use a cable tie to ensure the bottom of the strands stay together

#. Place your housing containing the power supply and Pico under the tree, and
   connect the strands to it

#. Plug the housing into the wall socket

#. Watch the status LED and cross your fingers!


First boot
==========

If everything goes correctly, you should see the status :term:`LED` start to
flash periodically, before eventually staying on. The flashes of the status LED
indicate the following:

2 flashes
    Indicates the Pico has booted Micropython and is trying to connect to the
    wifi AP

3 flashes
    The Pico has connected to the configured wifi AP and is trying to connect
    to the MQTT broker

solid
    The Pico has connected to the broker and is awaiting animations to display

5 flashes
    The Pico's script has crashed and it is not configured to reset
    automatically (by default, it will simply restart in this event)


.. _Pico Plus 2W: https://shop.pimoroni.com/products/pimoroni-pico-plus-2-w
.. _pimoroni-pico releases: https://github.com/pimoroni/pimoroni-pico/releases
.. _pimoroni-pico-rp2350 releases: https://github.com/pimoroni/pimoroni-pico-rp2350/releases
.. _illuminated button: https://thepihut.com/products/rugged-metal-pushbutton-with-blue-led-ring
